source/sheet.rst, before:

..    #!/usr/bin/env python3

.. _`sheets`:

######################################
Sheet Module -- Sheet and Row Access
######################################

..  py:module:: sheet

A *Sheet* is a generator
of *Row* objects.  A *Row* is a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances, identified by position.

We have three variations on :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`.

-   A simple :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`  lacks a schema.
    (This corresponds with :py:func:`csv.reader`.)
    For workbooks with a well-known physical format, the schema can be optional.
    Each :py:class:`sheet.Row` object can be built eagerly and accessed
    by position.

-   A sheet with a schema.  There are two variations.

    -   :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet` contains a schema.
        This could be a simple as column titles in the first row.
        (This corresponds to :py:class:`csv.DictReader`.)
        Or it could be considerably more complex.

    -   :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet` requires an external schema.
        This schema may be simply a list of column titles supplied externally.
        More often, the schema is a complete physical format description for
        Fixed or COBOL format files.

A known physical format (like a workbook) can build :py:class:`sheet.Row` objects eagerly with or without a schema.

In the case of COBOL and fixed-format files, however, a :py:class:`sheet.Row`
cannot be built eagerly.  It must be a lazy
object which only builds :py:class:`cell.Cell` as needed.
See :ref:`cobol` for details.

Get Embedded Schema Use Case
===============================

For an :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet`, the application (or Workbook) must 
do a three-step dance to get the schema that is embedded in the sheet.

1.  Build a :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet` with an
    "embedded schema loader" class.  (For example, :py:class:`schema.loader.HeadingRowSchemaLoader`.)
    The loader partitions rows into two sets: header and data.

2.  Load the schema from the sheet.
    The :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` will build an object of the loader class and use it to 
    gather the schema information.
    The schema loading may involve skipping irrelevant rows or
    combining multi-line headings or anything else required to parse the sheet.

3.  Get the rows from the sheet.
    This will, also, invoke the attached loader to filter rows so that the header is not seen as data.

..  parsed-literal::

    with *open* as wb:
        sheet = EmbeddedSchemaSheet( workbook, 'Sheet1', HeadingRowSchemaLoader )
        counts= process_sheet( sheet )
        pprint.pprint( counts )

Get External Schema Use Case
===============================

For an :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet`, the application (or Workbook) 
must do a four-step dance to get the schema.

1.  Build a schema loader.
    This loader will require a source workbook, sheet name and a reader object.

2.  Get the Schema object from the loader.

3.  Build a :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet` with the Schema object.

4.  Get the rows from the sheet.

And yes, the external source, is another
spreadsheet!  Worse, the external source could be a fixed file or workbook
for which a meta-schema is required to read the schema.

..  parsed-literal::

    with *open schema* as swb:
        esl = ExternalSchemaLoader( swb, sheet_name='Schema' )
        schema = esl.load()
    with *open data* as wb:
        sheet = ExternalSchemaSheet( wb, 'Sheet1', schema )
        counts= process_sheet( sheet )
        pprint.pprint( counts )

Get Rows Use Case
======================

The essential job of a :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` is to produce :py:class:`sheet.Row` instances.  
A row is a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

Note that :py:mod:`csv` is eager about building a row from the source data.
This isn't universally appropriate.  COBOL files require lazy construction
of the row's cells.

A :py:class:`schema.Schema` can transform a sequence row into a dictionary row
or a named tuple row.
The :py:attr:`schema.Attribute.name` becomes the key for this row-as-dictionary.

We specifically delegate the row-as-dictionary interpretation to the :py:class:`schema.Schema`,
and avoid doing it in the :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`.  This is because most
workbook schemata are flat.  However, a COBOL schema can have a very complex
structure, making the row-as-dictionary too simplistic to be useful.

As noted above, there are two candidate implementations of a Row.

-   **Eager**.  Appropriate for most (but not all) Physical Formats.  The
    idea is to apply the schema immediately to create the row as a
    tuple of cells.  :mod:`csv` does this, and it can be applied to
    other workbook formats.  It can be applied to simple, flat
    Fixed format files.

-   **Lazy**.  This is more appropriate for Fixed format files and COBOL format
    files.  Specifically, the data conversion, redefines and repeating group
    issues force us to wait for cell access rather than immediately create all
    possible cells.  Indeed, for  COBOL files with REDEFINES definitions,
    some of the cells cannot be built eagerly; application logic must determine
    which attributes are valid or invalid.
    
Note that the API is the same. The implementation differs.

Here's our prototypical code.

..  parsed-literal::

    def process_sheet( sheet ):
        counts= defaultdict( int )
        for row in sheet.rows():
            #\ *row is a sequence of* Cell *instances*
            print( repr(c) for c in row )
            counts['read'] += 1
        return counts

Ultimately, the sequence nature of a row is unsatisfying.   We'll have to
wait until :ref:`schema` to extend this into something useful.

Sheet Identification
=====================

For CSV and TAB files, as well as COBOL and Flat files, there is one anonymous
"sheet" that is the entire workbook.

For XLS, XLSX, and ODS formats, however, there are sheets within the workbook.

For Numbers, there are "pages" or "workspaces" that have multiple tables. Each
Numbers **table** is -- effectively -- a :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`. The
intermediate organization level, "workspace", is an additional detail.

We handle this in the following way.

-   One anonymous sheet has a name either of ``None`` or the basename of the file.

-   Simple sheets have names which are simple strings.

-   Numbers workspaces with sheets have names which are two-tuples of 
    workspace ("sheet") and table name.

Model
=======

..  code-block:: none

    http://yuml.me/diagram/scruffy;dir:td/class/
    #sheet,
    [Workbook]<>-n[Sheet],
    [Sheet]<>-n[Row],
    [Row]^[LazyRow],
    [LazyRow]-gets->[Workbook],
    [Sheet]^[EmbeddedSchemaSheet],
    [Sheet]^[ExternalSchemaSheet],
    [EmbeddedSchemaSheet]->[SchemaLoader].

..  image:: sheet.png

Overheads
==========

Sheet and Row are essentially lazy sequences.

::

    """stingray.sheet -- Defines Row as  a collection of Cells and Sheet as a collection of Rows.
    """
    from collections import Sequence

There are two "implicit" dependencies, also.
A row depends on details of an :py:class:`schema.Attribute` and a :py:class:`workbook.Workbook`.  
However, there's no real need to present a formal import for this.  
The Attribute and Workbook are simply opaque
objects passed around as arguments.

Sheet Class
=============

..  py:class:: Sheet

A :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` is an iterator over the rows of data in a workbook.
Subclasses implement different bindings for the sheet's schema information.

::

    class Sheet:
        """An iterator over rows.
            A binding to a workbook.
            A subclass of Sheet will be bound to a schema.
        """
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name ):
            self.workbook, self.name= workbook, sheet_name
        def __repr__( self ):
            return "{0}({1!r},{2!r})".format( self.__class__.__qualname__,
                self.workbook, self.name )
        def rows( self ):
            """Iterate through the rows of this sheet.
            This is a convenient interface for ``self.workbook.rows_of(self)``
            """
            return self.workbook.rows_of( self )

Row Class
=============

..  py:class:: Row

A single row in Sheet; a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

A Sheet produces this simple row-as-list.  A Schema can transform this
into row-as-dict or some even more elaborate structure.

A row depends on details of an :py:class:`schema.Attribute` 
and a :py:class:`workbook.Workbook`.  
This feels circular, but doesn't present any real problems.

The :py:class:`cell.Cell` conversions are handled by the Workbook.
Some Workbooks have cell content identified by position.
Some Workbooks have cell content identified by size, offset and encoding.
Therefore, we must provide the Attribute details to the Workbook
to get the Cell's value.

::

    class Row( Sequence ):
        """Eager Row: a tuple of Cell values."""
        def __init__( self, sheet, *data ):
            """Build another Row.

            :param sheet: the containing sheet.
            :param *data: the various Cell values in this row
            """
            self.sheet= sheet
            self.data= data
        def cell( self, attribute ):
            """Get a specific cell, based on a schema Attribute.

            :param attribute: The attribute's value to return.
            """
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
        def __len__( self ):
            return len(self.data)
        def __iter__( self ):
            return iter(self.data)
        def __contains__( self, cell ):
            return any( cell.value == d.value for d in self.data )
        def __getitem__( self, index ):
            return self.data[index]

To approach the :py:class:`csv.DictReader` API (without the eager processing),
we need make the ``Row`` API slightly more fluent with a ``by_name()``
method.

..  parsed-literal::

        def by_name( self, name ):
            attr= self.sheet.schema.get_name(name)
            return self.cell( attr )

Note that the presumption in this interface is that the Attribute is
sufficiently detailed to specify a single :py:class:`cell.Cell`.
For non-COBOL workbooks, this is perfectly true.

For COBOL, however, there are groups and occurs clauses, meaning that a single Attribute can
represent multiple :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
Which one do we mean?  And how do we specify this selection?

-   The :py:meth:`sheet.Row.cell` method can return a structure with all the values. 
    Ordinary Python can then pick apart the instances.
    This requires working up the DDE hierarchy to locate all of the applicable
    "occurs" by to construct the proper dimensionality of an attribute.

    It also means getting all of the values to create a tuple or nested
    tuple-of-tuple structure for the various dimensions.

-   The :py:class:`schema.Attribute.index` method
    selects data from the row in the workbook.  This applies the indices
    to the Attribute to compute the required offset into the source data.

..  py:class:: LazyRow

When we can't eagerly build all :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances for a given
row, this class provides the proper API.

A COBOL REDEFINES clause may make the bytes invalid in all but one of the
aliases for an attribute.  Also, there's no formal ``NULL`` value in COBOL, so
optional fields can have invalid data.

Further, we may have Occurs Depending On. This means we can't set size and
offset until we can access actual data.

For these reasons, we have a :py:class:`sheet.LazyRow`, which conforms to the
interface for a :py:class:`Row`, but isn't an actual sequence. No data is
processed until the :py:meth:`LazyRow.__getitem__` method is used.

::

    class LazyRow( Sequence ):
        """Lazy Row: a tuple-like sequence of Cell values."""
        def __init__( self, sheet, **state ):
            """Build another Row.

            :param sheet: the containing sheet.
            :param **state: worksheet-specific state value to save.
            """
            self.sheet= sheet
            self._state= state
            super().__init__()
        def __repr__( self ):
            return "LazyRow(sheet={0!r}, state={1!r})".format( self.sheet, self._state )
        def cell( self, attribute ):
            """Get a specific cell, based on a schema Attribute.

            :param attribute: The attribute's value to return.
            """
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
        def __len__( self ):
            return len(self.sheet.schema)
        def __iter__( self ):
            for attribute in self.sheet.schema:
                try:
                    yield self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
                except Exception as e:
                    yield None
        def __contains__( self, cell ):
            for attribute in self.sheet.schema:
                try:
                    col= self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
                except Exception as e:
                    pass
                if col.value == cell.value:
                    return True
        def __getitem__( self, index ):
            attribute= self.sheet.schema[index]
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )

To approach the :py:class:`csv.DictReader` API (without the eager processing),
we can make the ``Row`` API slightly more fluent with a ``by_name()``
method.

..  parsed-literal::

        def by_name( self, name ):
            attr= self.sheet.schema.get_name(name)
            return self.cell( attr )

ExternalSchemaSheet Class
==========================

..  py:class:: ExternalSchemaSheet

A Sheet with an external schema can be one of two kinds.

-   A Sheet that doesn't have row headers to embed the schema information.
    In this case, an eager Workbook Row can create a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
    The Schema information can be associated by position.

-   A Sheet that is really a COBOL or Fixed format file.
    In this case, the Workbook cannot create a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
    Instead, the Sheet (which has schema information) must
    provide a LazyRow with deferred Cell conversions.

::

    class ExternalSchemaSheet( Sheet ):
        """A Sheet with an external Schema."""
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name, schema ):
            """Initialize a sheet for processing.

            :param workbook: the containing workbook
            :param sheet_name: the specific sheet to locate within the Workbook
            :param schema: the :py:class:`schema.Schema` schema definition.
            """
            super().__init__( workbook, sheet_name )
            self.schema= schema
        def rows( self ):
            """Iterate through the rows of this sheet."""
            return self.workbook.rows_of( self )

EmbeddedSchemaSheet Class
==========================

..  py:class:: EmbeddedSchemaSheet

A sheet with an embedded schema must have a loader class provided.  The loader
is invoked to build a :py:class:`schema.Schema` object.
It's also used to return the rest of the rows; those that weren't used to build the schema.

::

    class EmbeddedSchemaSheet( ExternalSchemaSheet ):
        """A Sheet with a Schema embedded in it."""
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name, loader_class ):
            """Initialize a sheet for processing.

            :param workbook: the containing workbook
            :param sheet_name: the specific sheet to locate within the Workbook
            :param loader_class: the :py:class:`schema.loader.SchemaLoader`
            schema loader to load the schema from the sheet.

            Apply the loader to the given sheet of the workbook to get schema
            and rows.
            """
            s = Sheet( workbook, sheet_name )
            self.loader = loader_class( s )
            schema= self.loader.schema()
            super().__init__( workbook, sheet_name, schema=schema )
        def rows( self ):
            """The parser will skip over the headers."""
            return self.loader.rows()

Since the rows are already properly encoded as :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances,
no further processing is required by the Sheet or the Loader.

Rows of a Sheet
==================

Note that the :mod:`csv` design pattern for each row involves two subclasses
with the same method names but different results.  One
returns a ``dict`` of cells, the other returns a ``list`` of cells.

The dict-based processing has the advantage of clarity.  It has the
disadvantage of not coping well with duplicate column names or data
which breaks first normal form.

Also, note that :mod:`csv` does eager creation of each row.  
The :py:class:`csv.DictReader` does eager creation of a dictionary from each row.

We don't follow the :mod:`csv` design pattern.  Instead we do the following.

-   A :py:class:`sheet.Row` can be a lazy sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

-   A :py:class:`schema.Schema` must be used to fetch :py:class:`cell.Cell` 
    instances from the :py:class:`sheet.Row`.

-   To create dict-like access to Cell instances, the schema can be turned into a dictionary.  
    This "schema-as-dict" can then be used with a properly
    lazy Row to create Cell instances.

This lazy evaluation of a row that fetches data based on :py:class:`schema.Attribute`
details  allows us to cope with COBOL ``REDEFINES``.  It also allows us to cope
with the unfortunately common problem of duplicate column names in conventional
spreadsheets.

We can have application programming which looks like this to process rows in a number of ways.

Row as sequence is the default.

..  parsed-literal::

    for row in sheet.rows():
        *Cell:* row[i]
        *Schema Attribute Name:* sheet.schema[i].name

Row as dict is a common alternative.  If we have unique column names in the schema,
We can than use application programming that looks like this.

..  parsed-literal::

    schema_dict = dict( (a.name, a) for a in sheet.schema )
    for row in sheet.rows():
        *Cell:* row.cell(schema_dict['name'])
        row_as_dict= dict(
            (a.name, row.cell(a)) for a in sheet.schema )
        *Cell:* row_as_dict['name']

This handles the COBOL case, where rows must be lazy.
This includes COBOL ``REDEFINES`` and occurs clauses. 
This assures proper packed decimal conversion of redefined fields.

Commit message:

Version 4.4.4 Update:
-   Handle Compiler Control Statements ``EJECT``, ``SKIP1``, ``SKIP2``, and ``SKIP3``
    by silently dropping them in the lexical scanner.

-   Changed ``RENAMES`` handling to be a warning instead of an exception.
    This allows compiling -- but not fully processing -- DDE's with
    RENAMES clauses.

-   Handle "subrecord" processing. See :py:class:`stingray.test.cobol_2.Test_Copybook_13( DDE_Test )`.
    The idea is that we can do
    ``subrow= data.subrow( self.segment_abc, row.cell(schema_header_dict['GENERIC-FIELD'])  )``
    to map a field, ``GENERIC-FIELD``, to an 01-level schema, ``self.segment_abc``.
    We can then pick fields out of ``subrow`` using fields defined in ``self.segment_abc``.

source/sheet.rst, after:

..    #!/usr/bin/env python3

.. _`sheets`:

######################################
Sheet Module -- Sheet and Row Access
######################################

..  py:module:: sheet

A *Sheet* is a generator
of *Row* objects.  A *Row* is a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances, identified by position.

We have three variations on :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`.

-   A simple :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`  lacks a schema.
    (This corresponds with :py:func:`csv.reader`.)
    For workbooks with a well-known physical format, the schema can be optional.
    Each :py:class:`sheet.Row` object can be built eagerly and accessed
    by position.

-   A sheet with a schema.  There are two variations.

    -   :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet` contains a schema.
        This could be a simple as column titles in the first row.
        (This corresponds to :py:class:`csv.DictReader`.)
        Or it could be considerably more complex.

    -   :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet` requires an external schema.
        This schema may be simply a list of column titles supplied externally.
        More often, the schema is a complete physical format description for
        Fixed or COBOL format files.

A known physical format (like a workbook) can build :py:class:`sheet.Row` objects eagerly with or without a schema.

In the case of COBOL and fixed-format files, however, a :py:class:`sheet.Row`
cannot be built eagerly.  It must be a lazy
object which only builds :py:class:`cell.Cell` as needed.
See :ref:`cobol` for details.

Get Embedded Schema Use Case
===============================

For an :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet`, the application (or Workbook) must 
do a three-step dance to get the schema that is embedded in the sheet.

1.  Build a :py:class:`sheet.EmbeddedSchemaSheet` with an
    "embedded schema loader" class.  (For example, :py:class:`schema.loader.HeadingRowSchemaLoader`.)
    The loader partitions rows into two sets: header and data.

2.  Load the schema from the sheet.
    The :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` will build an object of the loader class and use it to 
    gather the schema information.
    The schema loading may involve skipping irrelevant rows or
    combining multi-line headings or anything else required to parse the sheet.

3.  Get the rows from the sheet.
    This will, also, invoke the attached loader to filter rows so that the header is not seen as data.

..  parsed-literal::

    with *open* as wb:
        sheet = EmbeddedSchemaSheet( workbook, 'Sheet1', HeadingRowSchemaLoader )
        counts= process_sheet( sheet )
        pprint.pprint( counts )

Get External Schema Use Case
===============================

For an :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet`, the application (or Workbook) 
must do a four-step dance to get the schema.

1.  Build a schema loader.
    This loader will require a source workbook, sheet name and a reader object.

2.  Get the Schema object from the loader.

3.  Build a :py:class:`sheet.ExternalSchemaSheet` with the Schema object.

4.  Get the rows from the sheet.

And yes, the external source, is another
spreadsheet!  Worse, the external source could be a fixed file or workbook
for which a meta-schema is required to read the schema.

..  parsed-literal::

    with *open schema* as swb:
        esl = ExternalSchemaLoader( swb, sheet_name='Schema' )
        schema = esl.load()
    with *open data* as wb:
        sheet = ExternalSchemaSheet( wb, 'Sheet1', schema )
        counts= process_sheet( sheet )
        pprint.pprint( counts )

Get Rows Use Case
======================

The essential job of a :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` is to produce :py:class:`sheet.Row` instances.  
A row is a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

Note that :py:mod:`csv` is eager about building a row from the source data.
This isn't universally appropriate.  COBOL files require lazy construction
of the row's cells.

A :py:class:`schema.Schema` can transform a sequence row into a dictionary row
or a named tuple row.
The :py:attr:`schema.Attribute.name` becomes the key for this row-as-dictionary.

We specifically delegate the row-as-dictionary interpretation to the :py:class:`schema.Schema`,
and avoid doing it in the :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`.  This is because most
workbook schemata are flat.  However, a COBOL schema can have a very complex
structure, making the row-as-dictionary too simplistic to be useful.

As noted above, there are two candidate implementations of a Row.

-   **Eager**.  Appropriate for most (but not all) Physical Formats.  The
    idea is to apply the schema immediately to create the row as a
    tuple of cells.  :mod:`csv` does this, and it can be applied to
    other workbook formats.  It can be applied to simple, flat
    Fixed format files.

-   **Lazy**.  This is more appropriate for Fixed format files and COBOL format
    files.  Specifically, the data conversion, redefines and repeating group
    issues force us to wait for cell access rather than immediately create all
    possible cells.  Indeed, for  COBOL files with REDEFINES definitions,
    some of the cells cannot be built eagerly; application logic must determine
    which attributes are valid or invalid.
    
Note that the API is the same. The implementation differs.

Here's our prototypical code.

..  parsed-literal::

    def process_sheet( sheet ):
        counts= defaultdict( int )
        for row in sheet.rows():
            #\ *row is a sequence of* Cell *instances*
            print( repr(c) for c in row )
            counts['read'] += 1
        return counts

Ultimately, the sequence nature of a row is unsatisfying.   We'll have to
wait until :ref:`schema` to extend this into something useful.

Sheet Identification
=====================

For CSV and TAB files, as well as COBOL and Flat files, there is one anonymous
"sheet" that is the entire workbook.

For XLS, XLSX, and ODS formats, however, there are sheets within the workbook.

For Numbers, there are "pages" or "workspaces" that have multiple tables. Each
Numbers **table** is -- effectively -- a :py:class:`sheet.Sheet`. The
intermediate organization level, "workspace", is an additional detail.

We handle this in the following way.

-   One anonymous sheet has a name either of ``None`` or the basename of the file.

-   Simple sheets have names which are simple strings.

-   Numbers workspaces with sheets have names which are two-tuples of 
    workspace ("sheet") and table name.

Model
=======

..  code-block:: none

    http://yuml.me/diagram/scruffy;dir:td/class/
    #sheet,
    [Workbook]<>-n[Sheet],
    [Sheet]<>-n[Row],
    [Row]^[LazyRow],
    [LazyRow]-gets->[Workbook],
    [Sheet]^[EmbeddedSchemaSheet],
    [Sheet]^[ExternalSchemaSheet],
    [EmbeddedSchemaSheet]->[SchemaLoader].

..  image:: sheet.png

Overheads
==========

Sheet and Row are essentially lazy sequences.

::

    """stingray.sheet -- Defines Row as  a collection of Cells and Sheet as a collection of Rows.
    """
    from collections import Sequence

There are two "implicit" dependencies, also.
A row depends on details of an :py:class:`schema.Attribute` and a :py:class:`workbook.Workbook`.  
However, there's no real need to present a formal import for this.  
The Attribute and Workbook are simply opaque
objects passed around as arguments.

Sheet Class
=============

..  py:class:: Sheet

A :py:class:`sheet.Sheet` is an iterator over the rows of data in a workbook.
Subclasses implement different bindings for the sheet's schema information.

::

    class Sheet:
        """An iterator over rows.
            A binding to a workbook.
            A subclass of Sheet will be bound to a schema.
        """
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name ):
            self.workbook, self.name= workbook, sheet_name
        def __repr__( self ):
            return "{0}({1!r},{2!r})".format( self.__class__.__qualname__,
                self.workbook, self.name )
        def rows( self ):
            """Iterate through the rows of this sheet.
            This is a convenient interface for ``self.workbook.rows_of(self)``
            """
            return self.workbook.rows_of( self )

Row Class
=============

..  py:class:: Row

A single row in Sheet; a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

A Sheet produces this simple row-as-list.  A Schema can transform this
into row-as-dict or some even more elaborate structure.

A row depends on details of an :py:class:`schema.Attribute` 
and a :py:class:`workbook.Workbook`.  
This feels circular. But this Sheet/Row schema definition is really
just a convenient wrapper around the Workbook details.

The :py:class:`cell.Cell` conversions are handled by the :py:class:`workbook.Workbook`.
Some Workbooks have cell content identified by position.
Some Workbooks have cell content identified by size, offset and encoding.
Therefore, we must provide the Attribute details to the Workbook
to get the Cell's value.

::

    class Row( Sequence ):
        """Eager Row: a tuple of Cell values."""
        def __init__( self, sheet, *data ):
            """Build another Row.

            :param sheet: the containing sheet.
            :param *data: the various Cell values in this row
            """
            self.sheet= sheet
            self.data= data
        def cell( self, attribute ):
            """Get a specific cell, based on a schema Attribute.

            :param attribute: The attribute's value to return.
            """
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
        def __len__( self ):
            return len(self.data)
        def __iter__( self ):
            return iter(self.data)
        def __contains__( self, cell ):
            return any( cell.value == d.value for d in self.data )
        def __getitem__( self, index ):
            return self.data[index]

To approach the :py:class:`csv.DictReader` API (without the eager processing),
we need make the ``Row`` API slightly more fluent with a ``by_name()``
method.

..  parsed-literal::

        def by_name( self, name ):
            attr= self.sheet.schema.get_name(name)
            return self.cell( attr )

Note that the presumption in this interface is that the Attribute is
sufficiently detailed to specify a single :py:class:`cell.Cell`.
For non-COBOL workbooks, this is perfectly true.

For COBOL, however, there are groups and occurs clauses, meaning that a single Attribute can
represent multiple :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
Which one do we mean?  And how do we specify this selection?

-   The :py:meth:`sheet.Row.cell` method can return a structure with all the values. 
    Ordinary Python can then pick apart the instances.
    This requires working up the DDE hierarchy to locate all of the applicable
    "occurs" by to construct the proper dimensionality of an attribute.

    It also means getting all of the values to create a tuple or nested
    tuple-of-tuple structure for the various dimensions.

-   The :py:class:`schema.Attribute.index` method
    selects data from the row in the workbook.  This applies the indices
    to the Attribute to compute the required offset into the source data.

..  py:class:: LazyRow

When we can't eagerly build all :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances for a given
row, this class provides the proper API.

A COBOL REDEFINES clause may make the bytes invalid in all but one of the
aliases for an attribute.  Also, there's no formal ``NULL`` value in COBOL, so
optional fields can have invalid data.

Further, we may have Occurs Depending On. This means we can't set size and
offset until we can access actual data.

For these reasons, we have a :py:class:`sheet.LazyRow`, which conforms to the
interface for a :py:class:`Row`, but isn't an actual sequence. No data is
processed until the :py:meth:`LazyRow.__getitem__` method is used.

::

    class LazyRow( Sequence ):
        """Lazy Row: a tuple-like sequence of Cell values."""
        def __init__( self, sheet, **state ):
            """Build another Row.

            :param sheet: the containing sheet.
            :param **state: worksheet-specific state value to save.
            """
            self.sheet= sheet
            self._state= state
            super().__init__()
        def __repr__( self ):
            return "LazyRow(sheet={0!r}, state={1!r})".format( self.sheet, self._state )
        def cell( self, attribute ):
            """Get a specific cell, based on a schema Attribute.

            :param attribute: The attribute's value to return.
            """
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
        def __len__( self ):
            return len(self.sheet.schema)
        def __iter__( self ):
            for attribute in self.sheet.schema:
                try:
                    yield self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
                except Exception as e:
                    yield None
        def __contains__( self, cell ):
            for attribute in self.sheet.schema:
                try:
                    col= self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )
                except Exception as e:
                    pass
                if col.value == cell.value:
                    return True
        def __getitem__( self, index ):
            attribute= self.sheet.schema[index]
            return self.sheet.workbook.row_get( self, attribute )

To approach the :py:class:`csv.DictReader` API (without the eager processing),
we can make the ``Row`` API slightly more fluent with a ``by_name()``
method.

..  parsed-literal::

        def by_name( self, name ):
            attr= self.sheet.schema.get_name(name)
            return self.cell( attr )

ExternalSchemaSheet Class
==========================

..  py:class:: ExternalSchemaSheet

A Sheet with an external schema can be one of two kinds.

-   A Sheet that doesn't have row headers to embed the schema information.
    In this case, an eager Workbook Row can create a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
    The Schema information can be associated by position.

-   A Sheet that is really a COBOL or Fixed format file.
    In this case, the Workbook cannot create a sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.  
    Instead, the Sheet (which has schema information) must
    provide a LazyRow with deferred Cell conversions.

::

    class ExternalSchemaSheet( Sheet ):
        """A Sheet with an external Schema."""
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name, schema ):
            """Initialize a sheet for processing.

            :param workbook: the containing workbook
            :param sheet_name: the specific sheet to locate within the Workbook
            :param schema: the :py:class:`schema.Schema` schema definition.
            """
            super().__init__( workbook, sheet_name )
            self.schema= schema
        def rows( self ):
            """Iterate through the rows of this sheet."""
            return self.workbook.rows_of( self )

EmbeddedSchemaSheet Class
==========================

..  py:class:: EmbeddedSchemaSheet

A sheet with an embedded schema must have a loader class provided.  The loader
is invoked to build a :py:class:`schema.Schema` object.
It's also used to return the rest of the rows; those that weren't used to build the schema.

::

    class EmbeddedSchemaSheet( ExternalSchemaSheet ):
        """A Sheet with a Schema embedded in it."""
        def __init__( self, workbook, sheet_name, loader_class ):
            """Initialize a sheet for processing.

            :param workbook: the containing workbook
            :param sheet_name: the specific sheet to locate within the Workbook
            :param loader_class: the :py:class:`schema.loader.SchemaLoader`
            schema loader to load the schema from the sheet.

            Apply the loader to the given sheet of the workbook to get schema
            and rows.
            """
            s = Sheet( workbook, sheet_name )
            self.loader = loader_class( s )
            schema= self.loader.schema()
            super().__init__( workbook, sheet_name, schema=schema )
        def rows( self ):
            """The parser will skip over the headers."""
            return self.loader.rows()

Since the rows are already properly encoded as :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances,
no further processing is required by the Sheet or the Loader.

Rows of a Sheet
==================

Note that the :mod:`csv` design pattern for each row involves two subclasses
with the same method names but different results.  One
returns a ``dict`` of cells, the other returns a ``list`` of cells.

The dict-based processing has the advantage of clarity.  It has the
disadvantage of not coping well with duplicate column names or data
which breaks first normal form.

Also, note that :mod:`csv` does eager creation of each row.  
The :py:class:`csv.DictReader` does eager creation of a dictionary from each row.

We don't follow the :mod:`csv` design pattern.  Instead we do the following.

-   A :py:class:`sheet.Row` can be a lazy sequence of :py:class:`cell.Cell` instances.

-   A :py:class:`schema.Schema` must be used to fetch :py:class:`cell.Cell` 
    instances from the :py:class:`sheet.Row`.

-   To create dict-like access to Cell instances, the schema can be turned into a dictionary.  
    This "schema-as-dict" can then be used with a properly
    lazy Row to create Cell instances.

This lazy evaluation of a row that fetches data based on :py:class:`schema.Attribute`
details  allows us to cope with COBOL ``REDEFINES``.  It also allows us to cope
with the unfortunately common problem of duplicate column names in conventional
spreadsheets.

We can have application programming which looks like this to process rows in a number of ways.

Row as sequence is the default.

..  parsed-literal::

    for row in sheet.rows():
        *Cell:* row[i]
        *Schema Attribute Name:* sheet.schema[i].name

Row as dict is a common alternative.  If we have unique column names in the schema,
We can than use application programming that looks like this.

..  parsed-literal::

    schema_dict = dict( (a.name, a) for a in sheet.schema )
    for row in sheet.rows():
        *Cell:* row.cell(schema_dict['name'])
        row_as_dict= dict(
            (a.name, row.cell(a)) for a in sheet.schema )
        *Cell:* row_as_dict['name']

This handles the COBOL case, where rows must be lazy.
This includes COBOL ``REDEFINES`` and occurs clauses. 
This assures proper packed decimal conversion of redefined fields.
